In 2019, France watched a national
treasure go up in flames.
Now, there's a fear that the structures
holding up French politics are starting
to catch. There is clearly a problem
with French public [music] finances. by
the worsening of the budget deficit.
France's political crisis deepened
today.
Most French citizens adore their
nation's system of social safety nets,
but those programs have become
increasingly unsustainable.
France has the Eurozone's largest
deficit, massive debt, and every attempt
at reform has ended the same way.
Surprise resignation of from the Prime
Minister. Four Prime Ministers in 20
months. We're heading into our fifth
Prime Minister now in 2 years. French
politics is in a bit of a mess. It
really is an unprecedented uh crisis.
Benefit reform sparks this.
Unions break out the flares, and fragile
coalitions collapse under the strain.
France is currently characterized
characterized by political blockage due
to a very difficult public finance
situation. What people talk about is
sort of a [music] a gradual sort of
suffocation of France's ability to deal
with its fundamental economic problems.
History suggests that at this point,
it's more likely that only a shock can
force change. The question is, what or
who would deliver it?
The French government has a long history
of running up debt. Last year, France
paid about 60 billion euros in interest
[music] alone, which is about equivalent
to its defense spending.
>> Well, of course, we're 100 billion a
year in debt servicing [music] costs by
the end of this decade. We live in a
world where all countries are taking on
debt post-COVID, but I think France is
definitely [music] a concerning
standout. You can see just how grave the
debt burden is by comparing it to
Germany's over the last 20 years. What
you see is that they're more or less at
the same level until the global
financial crisis. And then both their
debt burdens start to increase, but
France's increases further. And then you
get to the Eurozone debt crisis, and
while Germany manages to correct after
the crisis, France's debt burden just
keeps [music] ticking up. And that has
sort of happened again in COVID.
And actually, it's likely to continue to
[music] increase in the future. If
nothing is done, it can only increase.
There were some forecasts that say that
the debt-to-GDP [music] ratio will reach
125%.
But other forecasts are pointing to 150%
in 2035.
Meanwhile, those tens of billions of
euros in interest payments must
continue. That's money that can't be
spent on what the public expects. France
is characterized by a very [music] high
level of public spending, around 57% of
GDP. Eurozone is closer [music] to 50%.
Germany is below that. The UK is below
that. The US [music] is closer to 40%.
One of the key challenges to that is the
sort of almost sacred role of the social
security system [music]
in France. This idea that the French
state is responsible for ensuring
equality and solidarity, [music]
fraternity between citizens in
education, in health, unemployment
insurance, and pensions. [music]
So, protecting the people and protecting
mostly the oldest people in the country.
So,
>> [music]
>> 60% of those public spending is going to
the oldest people in the country.
Pensions are one of the main reasons
France's debt keeps rising and markets
keep sweating.
What might be a private pension system
in other countries runs through the
balance sheet of the French state. For a
lot of people, it can go [music]
above 3,000 euros a month. So, this is
much higher than the wage on average.
So, it's very important for public
opinion. They are very protective about
this.
Protests erupted across France in 2023
when the government raised the
retirement age from 62 to 64. More than
half a million people marched across
France. Macron and the government are
attacking one of the central rights of
the working class. As the society gets
older, and as the working population
relative to people out of work shrinks,
it basically costs a lot more to keep
that coverage going. So now, France has
rising debt, swelling pension bills,
fewer workers, and shrinking tax
revenue. In finance, this is what's
technically known as not ideal.
Now, in a perfect world, you'd fix this
with a mix of higher taxes, lower
benefits, or short-term borrowing until
growth catches up. But, and sorry if
this comes as a depressing surprise, we
don't live in a perfect world.
We know also that from
innovation point of view, Europe is
really much struggling to catch up. So
for now, France keeps borrowing. But
lenders usually shy away from heavily
indebted, politically gridlocked
countries. And because about 60% of
French debt is held abroad, France is
especially exposed to swings of investor
sentiment. I think you can see from, for
example, credit downgrades, recently a
lot of concern from rating agencies and
debt investors to the direction of
travel of French public finances. Now,
that has a kind of a feedback loop
because as bond investors lose
confidence, they [music] tend to sell
the bonds, and that drives up the
borrowing costs for France.
It shows up clearly in the French-German
spread, the premium France pays to
borrow compared with Germany, the
Eurozone's benchmark. So, they're
borrowing around 2.7%. [music]
France is around 3.5%. So, that
difference is 0.8 [music]
percentage points, or 80 basis points.
That is the measure of the spread. So,
why does that matter? The spread is this
sort of extra cost for the French state
to finance [music] itself. But it's
important also because that has a ripple
effect through the economy. It has a big
bearing on mortgages, on consumer loans,
on loans that businesses [music] need to
invest. And so, the spread is the price
that the whole French economy [music]
pays
for the political instability, for the
uncertainty. So, a large number of
French voters won't accept reduced
benefits, but the state can't afford
them, and borrowing costs are therefore
on a tear.
Why is this so hard to fix?
France has been in uncharacteristic
political instability since the snap
elections in 2024.
You need to understand two things.
France has a president, that's this
chap, but it also has something of a
problematic addiction to switching Prime
Ministers.
I think we are at the fourth one or
fifth one. It's hard to keep count,
actually. So, Edouard Philippe,
uh Elisabeth Borne. She was then
replaced by Gabriel Attal. Barnier.
Barnier was brought down in a
no-confidence vote. Then uh Bayrou.
That's four. And no, Sébastien Lecornu.
In fact, Sébastien Lecornu has resigned
and then been reappointed. So, in some
respects, we've had six Prime Ministers
that have tried to reckon with this very
unstable political situation.
That is leading to a stuck parliament
that cannot find agreement and that
cannot make reforms that are needed in
order to solve the very big issue of uh
the public finance situation.
Because everybody has their eye on the
next presidential election, nobody wants
to be seen uh to be pushing through
unpopular measures for a for a budget.
Things like exhibit A. You still have
2/3 of the French opposed to the pension
reform. So, that's why we just keep
getting this instability. It's because
France needs a budget, but France can't
actually get one together.
The political stalemate is also
preventing Eurozone unity in the face of
outside challenges.
Europe is in a situation where it needs
to go toe-to-toe with with China and the
US. The world needs a credible and
strong Europe, and you can't have a
credible and strong Europe without a
credible and strong France. France,
along with Germany, really is the core
of the Euro. Together, they make up half
of the Eurozone's GDP. France also is
the biggest food producer in the EU. It
has the biggest army, and it has nuclear
weapons.
Many experts say only the 2027
presidential race can break the impasse.
But that, too, is a source of anxiety
for markets and world leaders.
We know that in 2027, Macron is gone.
So, who will replace him? All parties
are thinking about the presidential
election. They are all like positioning
themself for the campaign. The [music]
far right is potentially on track to win
the next election, whether it's
parliamentary, [music] but especially
presidential. That could really pressure
the Eurozone. [music] I mean, you look
at the National Rally, Marine Le Pen's
party, has done it very well in recent
legislative elections. Both the far left
and the far [music] right are proposing
a lot more spending, and they both would
double down on the current [music]
problems without really tackling them. I
think that it would be quite [music] a
challenge for European partners and the
Euro if you had France going this
direction. So, is there any optimism to
be found while we wait? To be fair to to
Macron, he has had a lot of success in
pushing through the what we call
structural reforms, just, you know,
make it easier to invest or easier to
hire, more flexibility in the labor
force. And amid the gloom, Notre Dame
endures, a reminder that France can find
unity when it needs it most. The
restoration of Notre Dame Cathedral is
really one of the few good news stories
that's come out of France. Macron made a
promise that in 5 years time the
cathedral will be reopened and restored.
And he kept that promise. I think down
to a few reasons that might apply to the
current crisis facing France. The first
is Macron set a deadline and stuck to
it. [music] That takes leadership.
Secondly, in all of French society,
right up to the ultra rich, gave money
to help fund [music] the restoration.
And finally, there was a real
willingness to think outside of the box.
Not every onerous
>> [music]
>> building regulation was followed. There
was a lot of creativity and a lot of
seriousness. And I think that that could
help a political [music] crisis like
this one.